Entity and connections API (#308)
neo4j/docs-graphql: modules/ROOT/pages/entity-and-connections-api.adoc

= Entity API and connections API
:description: This page introduces the entity and connections APIs and aims to shed light on their differences, when to use which API, and how they can be combined in practice.

> This page introduces the entity and connections APIs and aims to shed light on their differences, when to use which API, and how they can be combined in practice.

Author: ```suggestion

This page introduces the entity and connections APIs and aims to shed light on their differences, when to use which API, and how they can be combined in practice.
```

= Entity API and connections API

> :description: This page introduces the entity and connections APIs and aims to shed light on their differences, when to use which API and how they can be mixed in practice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:description: This page introduces the entity and connections APIs and aims to shed light on their differences, when to use which API, and how they can be combined in practice.
```
Just a suggestion

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page introduces the entity and connections APIs and aims to shed light on their differences, when to use which API, and how they can be combined in practice.
The entity and connections APIs are distinct APIs you can explore with the Apollo Server.
Examples drawn from the auto-generated fields of the two APIs are used throughout the GraphQL Library documentation, but the differences and separations between them are implicit.
This page aims to clarify these points, when to use which API, and how they can be combined in practice.
```

> The xref:index.adoc[introduction] or one of the xref:getting-started/index.adoc[getting started] pages touch on the topic of auto-generated fields exactly the GraphQL Library generates based on the type definition schema that you provide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on auto-generated fields and how the GraphQL Library generates them based on the type definition schema that you provide, see the xref:index.adoc[Introduction] and the xref:getting-started/index.adoc[Getting started] pages.
```

Is there a specific page on the Getting Started pages about this? It would be more helpful to link it directly.

Author: it's two tutorials, either for self-hosting or for aura, that's why :/

> It is a pair of distinct APIs that you can explore with the Apollo Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Examples drawing from the auto-generated fields of the two APIs are used throughout the GraphQL Library documentation, but the difference and separation of them is implicit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think it would be better to move these paragraphs to the top to make it clearer what the page is about right from the start.

== Distinction

> The entity API allows ofr simple traversal while the connections API allows access to relationship properties, more complex features such as aggregations and it is xref:integrations/relay-compatibility.adoc[relay-compatible].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The entity API allows simple traversal, while the connections API provides access to relationship properties and more complex features such as aggregations, and it is xref:integrations/relay-compatibility.adoc[relay-compatible].
```

Knowing the difference allows you to make a more deliberate choice of when to use which API.

Consider the following type definitions:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Movie @node {
    title: String!
    released: Int
    actors: [Person!]! @relationship(type: "ACTED_IN", direction: IN, properties: "ActedInProps")
}

type Person @node {
    name: String!
    movies: [Movie!]! @relationship(type: "ACTED_IN", direction: OUT, properties: "ActedInProps")
}

type ActedInProps @relationshipProperties {
    roles: [String!]!
}
----

The following sections outline the entity and connections APIs that are generated based on the definitions.

[NOTE]
====

> To explore the different fields outlined on this page yourself, put the type definitions in a JavaScript file and fire up an Apollo server as explained in the xref:getting-started/graphql-self-hosted.adoc[Self-hosting GraphQL] guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can explore the different fields outlined on this page by putting the type definitions in a JavaScript file and firing up an Apollo server, as explained in the xref:getting-started/graphql-self-hosted.adoc[Self-hosting GraphQL] guide.
```

Reviewer: I would move this note to the introduction, but it might just be a style suggestion. 

In the getting started guide, I usually put the example used throughout the page as the first topic, so users can have this setup first thing if they want to try it out. However, this is more of a tutorial-like format, so it's just a suggestion, not a style-guide-related approach.

====

== Entity API

The entity API provides the following fields for the `Movie` and `Person` `@node` types:

[source, text, indent=0]
----
movies(...): [Movie!]!

people(...): [Person!]!
----

Each entity can take four arguments:

* `where`
* `limit`
* `offset`
* `sort`

> The `where` and `sort` arguments can be used to filter and sort query results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the `where` and `sort` arguments can be used for xref:filtering.adoc[filtering] and xref:sorting.adoc[sorting] query results, `limit` and `offset` allow for xref:queries-aggregations/pagination.adoc#pagination-offset-based[offset-based pagination].
```

> Refer to xref:filtering.adoc[] and xref:sorting.adoc[].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> `limit` and `offset` allow for xref:queries-aggregations/pagination.adoc#pagination-offset-based[offset-based pagination].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Also, note that: 
```

> `Movie` and `Person` entities are connected via the `ACTED_IN` relationship.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

* The `Movie` and `Person` entities are connected via the `ACTED_IN` relationship.
```

> `Movie` types have a field `actors` that is a list of `Person` entities, while `Person` entities have a field `movies` that is a list of `Movie` entities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `Movie` types have an `actors` field that is a list of `Person` entities, while the `Person` entities have a `movies` field that is a list of `Movie` entities.
This means you can access other entities directly from an entity that is connected to them.
```

> This means that you can access other entities directly from an entity that is connected to them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Note that alongside the `actors` field (for `Movie` entities) and the `movies` field (for `Person` entities) you can also access the fields `actorsConnection` and `moviesConnection` respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Alongside the `actors` field (for `Movie` entities) and the `movies` field (for `Person` entities), you can access the `actorsConnection` and `moviesConnection` fields, respectively.
```

> These fields are provided by the connections API, not the entity API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These fields are provided by the connections API, not the entity API, and you can combine both APIs at certain levels in the same query.
```

> You can mix both APIs at certain levels in the same query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> A `Movie` entity also allows you to access the `title` and `released` fields, while a `Person` entity allows you to access its `name` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `Movie` entity also allows you to access the `title` and `released` fields, while a `Person` entity allows you to access its `name` field.
For example:
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query EntityApi {
  movies(limit: 10, offset: 5) {
    title
    released
    actors(limit: 2) {
      name
    }
  }
}
----

== Connections API

The connections API follows a different approach.
For each entity identified in the schema, it creates a connection field:

[source, text, indent=0]
----
moviesConnection(...): MoviesConnection!

peopleConnection(...): PeopleConnection!
----

Each connection can take four arguments:

* `first`
* `after`
* `where`
* `sort`

While `where` and `sort` are used to xref:filtering.adoc[filter] and xref:sorting.adoc[sort] query results similarly to the entity API, `first` and `after` describe a pagination cursor that you can use in subsequent queries (see xref:queries-aggregations/pagination.adoc#pagination-cursor-based[cursor-based pagination]).

Connections fields can access the following:

* `aggregate`
* `edges`
* `pageInfo`
* `totalCount`

> For examples on how to use the `aggregate` field, refer xref:queries-aggregations/aggregations.adoc#_querying_aggregations[].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For examples on how to use the `aggregate` field, refer to xref:queries-aggregations/aggregations.adoc#_querying_aggregations[].
```

Surge is not working, so I'm not sure how the link text appears

`edges` represent a set of relationship connections.
They let you access the fields `cursor`, which is the pagination cursor, and `node`, which makes the corresponding field provided by the entity API accessible.

> This means that you can at this level mix in the entity API while you are using the connections API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that you can, at this level, combine the entity API with the connections API.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

=== Nested connections
```

Nested connections also let you access the relationship properties via the field `properties`.
This does not work with top-level connections.

For example:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query ConnectionApi {
  moviesConnection(first: 10) {
    edges {
      node {
        title
        actorsConnection {
          edges {
            node {
              name
            }
            properties {
              roles
            }
          }
        }
      }aggregation.a
      cursor
    }
    aggregate {
      node {
        title {
          longest
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----

Note how `actorsConnection` is available under `moviesConnection.edges.node`, which is different from the top-level `peopleConnection`.

> It's a nested connection and lets you access the relationship property `roles`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's a nested connection, and it lets you access the relationship property `roles`.
```

`pageInfo` has the fields `startCursor`, `endCursor`, `hasPreviousPage` and `hasNextPage` which are used for xref:queries-aggregations/pagination.adoc#pagination-cursor-based[pagination].

Finally, `totalCount` is the number of connection items.

> == Links

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Keep learning
```

> * xref:directives/schema-configuration/index.adoc[] - Configure your schema and limit field accessibility

Reviewer: I think all these topics should have a full stop, maybe? And follow the same style

Author: added suggestions

> * xref:directives/schema-configuration/index.adoc[] - Configure your schema and limit field accessibility

Author: ```suggestion
* xref:directives/schema-configuration/index.adoc[] - Configure your schema and limit field accessibility.
```

> * xref:relationships/index.adoc[] - Learn more about relationships

Author: ```suggestion
* xref:relationships/index.adoc[] - Learn more about relationships.
```

> * Pages about xref:filtering.adoc[] and xref:sorting.adoc[]

Reviewer: For example, to make it like the previous links: 

```suggestion
* xref:filtering.adoc[] and xref:sorting.adoc[] - Find information about filtering and sortering.
```

* More about xref:queries-aggregations/aggregations.adoc[]

> * More aobut xref:queries-aggregations/pagination.adoc[]

Author: ```suggestion
* More about xref:queries-aggregations/aggregations.adoc[].
* More aobut xref:queries-aggregations/pagination.adoc[].
```

= Entity API and connections API
:description: This page introduces the entity and connections APIs and aims to shed light on their differences, when to use which API, and how they can be combined in practice.

> This page introduces the entity and connections APIs and aims to shed light on their differences, when to use which API, and how they can be combined in practice.

Reviewer: Isn't this already stated in line 8? I think you don't need this paragraph here too 

```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

It is a pair of distinct APIs that you can explore with the Apollo Server.
Examples drawing from the auto-generated fields of the two APIs are used throughout the GraphQL Library documentation, but the difference and separation of them is implicit.

== Distinction

The API split is mainly due to development-historic reasons.

> The entity API came first and is simpler and more performant, while the connections API allows for relationship traversal, accessing relationship fields, aggregations and more.

Reviewer 2: While this is partially true, I don't think it is too relevant for users the historic reasons.

Just stating the main differenceces should be enough: Entity API allows for simple traversal, whilst connectons API allow access to relationship proerties, more complex features (such aggregations) and it is Relay compatible
